---
layout: post
title:  "Futures 0.3.0-alpha.3"
author: "Josef Brandl"
author_github: "MajorBreakfast"
date:   2018-01-01
categories: blog
---

`0.3.0-alpha.3` requires a recent nightly (2018-08-xx or newer):
```sh
$ rustup update
```

## Compatibility layer

A compatibility layer between 0.3 an 0.1 was developped. It is now possible to convert an 0.3 future into an 0.1 future and vice versa. Similar conversions for streams and sinks are also supported. Additionally it is now possible to run 0.3 futures and async functions on Tokio's executor. We have a dedicated blog post coming up that explains this in more detail.

## Spawning

### `Spawn` trait

The `std::task::Executor` trait is now called `Spawn`. The purpose of the trait remains unchanged - it is to provide a mechanism for spawning tasks. We noticed that in many implementations the responsibilty of spawning tasks is handled by a type that merely sends the task to an associated executor, not by the task executor type itself. Furthermore, it became clear that the former trait name "`Executor`" didn't properly capture the essence of what it means to be an executor. Fundamentally, a task executor is a type that manages the execution of tasks. There exists no fixed set of methods that a trait could define. Instead, each task executor type offers different methods that make sense for its design goals. This is why we chose to rename the trait to `Spawn` to reflect that it merely defines a method for spawning tasks and makes no specifications about how to run them.

As a consequence of this renaming, some functions on `Context` were adjusted:
```rust
impl<'a> Context<'a> {
    pub fn new(local_waker: &'a LocalWaker, spawner: &'a mut dyn Spawn) -> Context<'a> { ... }

    pub fn spawner(&mut self) -> &mut dyn Spawn { ... }

    pub fn with_spawner<'b, Sp: Spawn>(&'b mut self, spawner: &'b mut Sp) -> Context<'b>

    ...
}
```
### Spawn macros

This release of futures-rs introduces the `spawn!` and `spawn_with_handle!` macros for use in async functions, closures and blocks. Both macros let you spawn a task that polls the given future to completion. The task is spawned via the current context's spawner.

`spawn!` lets you spawn futures with `Output = ()`:

```rust
#![feature(async_await, await_macro, futures_api)]
#[macro_use] extern crate futures;

spawn!(future).unwrap();
```

`spawn_with_handle!` lets you spawn futures with any `Output: Send` type and also lets you await the produced output value:

```rust
let join_handle = spawn_with_handle!(future).unwrap();
let output = await!(join_handle);
```

`spawn!` is slightly cheaper than `spawn_with_handle!` since it doesn't need to provide a way to get the output.

Should spawning fail, a `SpawnError` error is returned which contains information about why it failed.

So what futures can be spawned? There are some requirements: The future needs to be `Send` and `'static` and the output needs to be `Send`. Here's why:
- The `'static` lifetime means that the future cannot contain any non-static (exterior) references. This is required so that the spawned task can be run independently to the task that spawns it.
- The `Send` bounds mean that the future and its output can be safely sent to other operating system threads. This is required so that multithreaded executors can run the spawned task on any operating thread they choose.

Note: You can execute non-`Send`, non-`'static` futures concurrently via the `join!` macro.

### Spawn methods

For use outside of async functions, there's also something new: The `SpawnExt` trait. It provides the methods `spawn` and `spawn_with_handle`:

```rust
use futures::task::SpawnExt;

// spawn()
spawner.spawn(future).unwrap();

// spawn_with_handle()
let join_handle = spawner.spawn_with_handle(future).unwrap();
```

Inside `poll`, you can use these methods by accessing the context's spawner via `Context::spawner`:

```rust
fn poll(self: PinMut<Self>, cx: &mut task::Context) -> Poll<T> {
    cx.spawner().spawn(future).unwrap();
}
```

### The plan: `spawn` with `dyn Future`

We plan to eventually replace `SpawnExt::spawn` with `Spawn::spawn`. This method will live directly in the `Spawn` trait defined in libcore. It's signature will look like this:

```rust
fn spawn(
    &mut self,
    future: dyn Future<Output = ()> + Send + 'static,
) -> Result<(), SpawnError>
```

This method can't be implemented just yet due to compiler limitations:
- Arbitrary self types are currently not object-safe: `Future::poll` uses `PinMut` as arbitrary self type. This unfortunately makes it impossible to create trait objects for `Future`. Therefore, `Box<dyn Future>` and `&dyn Future` are *currently* not supported.
- Unsized rvalues are not yet available: Trait objects (`dyn Trait`) are `!Sized` because the size of a trait object depends on the size of the concrete type behind it and can therefore only be known at runtime. Currently we often use `Box<dyn Trait>` which stores the trait object on the heap to circumvent that. The unsized rvalues feature will make it possible to store `!Sized` types on the stack.

To circumvent these limitations, we currently have `FutureObj` and `Spawn::spawn_obj`. These are, however, just a temporary solution until we can introduce the planned `spawn` method. The planned `spawn` method will make it possible to have one fewer heap allocation because the future is kept on the stack for as long as possible.

## `pin-utils` crate

The pin macros now live in their own crate, the `pin-utils` crate. The macros are general purpose and can be used in any project that uses the pinning API.

The crate includes the macros for (un)pin projections `unsafe_pinned!` and `unsafe_unpinned!` and the macro for stack pinning `pin_mut!`:

```rust
let foo = Foo { /* ... */ };
pin_mut!(foo); // PinMut<Foo>
```

Version `0.1.0-alpha.1` is now available on [crates.io](https://crates.io/crates/pin-utils) and the API docs are available on [docs.rs](https://docs.rs/pin-utils).

## Further changes

A complete list of changes can be found in our [changelog](https://github.com/rust-lang-nursery/futures-rs/blob/master/CHANGELOG.md).
